---
pagetitle: Research Manifesto | C.B. Aberlé
---

# Foundations of procedural epistemology: a manifesto

> *"Modern logic, as I hope is now evident, has the effect of enlarging our abstract imagination, and providing an infinite number of possible hypotheses to be applied in the analysis of any complex fact. In this respect it is the exact opposite of the logic practised by the classical tradition. In that logic, hypotheses which seem primâ facie possible are professedly proved impossible, and it is decreed in advance that reality must have a certain special character. In modern logic, on the contrary, while the primâ facie hypotheses as a rule remain admissible, others, which only logic would have suggested, are added to our stock, and are very often found to be indispensable if a right analysis of the facts is to be obtained. The old logic put thought in fetters, while the new logic gives it wings."*
>
> – Bertrand Russell, ["Logic as the Essence of Philosophy"](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Logic+as+the+Essence+of+Philosophy)

In what follows, I will try to say something about the central motivations for my academic work, and outline my 'research programme', insofar as I have such a thing. In brief, I am interested in developing what might be called *foundations of procedural epistemology*. The term *procedural epistemology* is here borrowed from a book which has exercised an enormous influence on the development of my thinking: Abelson & Sussman's [*Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs*](https://mitpress.mit.edu/sites/default/files/sicp/index.html). In the preface to that book, the authors remark:

> "The computer revolution is a revolution in the way we think and in the way we express what we think. The essence of this change is the emergence of what might best be called *procedural epistemology* – the study of the structure of knowledge from an imperative point of view, as opposed to the more declarative point of view taken by classical mathematical subjects. Mathematics provides a framework for dealing precisely with notions of 'what is.' Computation provides a framework for dealing precisely with notions of 'how to.'"

It is precisely this *procedural structure or knowledge* that I seek to explore further. My fundamental idea is that this structure, understood appropriately, lies at the heart of logic itself, and hence underlies all forms of knowledge, inquiry, and problem-solving. More generally, I believe that an acquaintance with the procedural aspect of logic can effect the same sort of enlargement of our abstract imagination as spoken of by Russell in the quote at the beginning of this essay. Indeed, my view of the contemporary status of logic is well-expressed by that quote, though in an ironic twist, what for me occupies the place of Russell's 'old logic' is itself the logic that Russell himself championed – what today goes under the heading of 'classical logic'.[^1]  Classical logic is typically concerned with the *truth* or *falsity* of expressions in various languages and formalisms. By contrast, the 'new logic' that I am interested in is primarily concerned not with the *bare* truth of expressions, but with the *processes* that witness such truth – not *that* something is true, but *how* it is true.

This procedural conception of logic owes its growth in recent decades to a confluence of three mathematical disciplines: constructive mathematics, category theory, and computer science, whose interconnections with one another have become increasingly apparent in that time. The programme of exploring these connections was branded 'computational trinitarianism' by Robert Harper in ["The Holy Trinity"](https://existentialtype.wordpress.com/2011/03/27/the-holy-trinity/), where he writes:

> "The central dogma of computational trinitarianism holds that Logic, Languages, and Categories are but three manifestations of one divine notion of computation."

I am not one for dogma, but I share with the trinitarians a conviction in the revelatory insight provided by contemplation of the manifold[^2] nature of procedural truth. The gospel I preach, however, obviates the trinity, and gives a single name to this divine essence: its name is *information*. Information, as I understand it, is simply anything suitably structured so as to be acted upon by processes according to formal rules. The foundations of procedural epistemology, then, are to be concerned with *information* in this abstract sense. What I seek is therefore to understand the various ways that information may be structured (*abstraction*), and the ways in which processes that act upon such information combine to form complex systems (*interaction*). I believe that the tools for this job are to be found throughout the mathematical sciences, including (but not limited to): category theory, type theory, general systems theory, etc.

Everything I have said so far is only suggestive of a true, general theory of *abstraction* and *interaction*, hence of *information* and *information-processing systems*. The true test of such a theory, whether it deserves to be called *foundations of procedural epistemology*, lies ultimately with the applications it finds. I anticipate that such a theory, if successful, could profitably contribute to the design and analysis of programming languages, systems of formal proof, and computational systems more generally. Ultimately, however, the greatest prize I see this theory as offering is just what Russell spoke of in the quote which began this manifesto: an expansion of our capacity for invention and depth of insight in all structured domains of knowledge and intellectual activity.

We may agree with Russell that the logic of the ancients kept our reason earthbound, and that classical logic, by coupling logical notions with mathematical methods, was able to propel our theoretical imagination into the stratosphere. Yet just as aeronautics paved the way for astronautics, so it is high time for us to inaugurate the logical space-age, by embracing the computational element of abstract reasoning, and making good on the promise of *procedural epistemology*. Just as Russell sought to emancipate reason from the shackles of the old logic, so I now invoke another manifesto, and say to the intellectual workers of the world that, in adopting a procedural view of the structure of knowledge, they have nothing to lose but their chains, and a world to gain.

[^1]: To be entirely fair to Russell, his logic was not quite synonymous with what we would today call 'classical logic', although the differences between Russell's logic and contemporary classical logic are well beyond the scope of this manifesto.
[^2]: Arguably, Harper's 'divine notion of computation' has more than just three manifestations, as equally profound connections to topology, physics, etc. have been observed or suggested by various commentators, e.g. [Baez & Stay](https://arxiv.org/abs/0903.0340).